.TH SDATA 1 "2026-07-07" "sdata 0.13.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
sdata \- statistical data interpreter for tabular data processing
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sdata
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ script ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sdata
is an interactive interpreter for data step\-based processing of tabular
datasets.
It is inspired by the Systat BASIC data step model and operates on a
two\-dimensional table of rows (records) and columns (variables).
.PP
When invoked without a script argument,
.B sdata
enters an interactive read\-eval\-print loop (REPL).
When a script file is provided it is executed non\-interactively and the
interpreter exits when the script completes.
.PP
Data can be read from and written to CSV, ODF, and OOXML (Excel) files.
A built\-in suite of statistical functions covers probability distributions,
aggregate statistics, and record navigation.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Print the version string and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-copyright
Print copyright and license information and exit.
.TP
.BI \-m " size"
Set the maximum in\-memory table size in cells (rows \(mu columns).
A value of 0 disables the limit (all data stays in memory).
When the table grows beyond this limit its rows are spilled to a
temporary SQLite database on disk.
The SQLite backend supports at most approximately 2000 columns per
spilled table; datasets with more columns than that limit cannot be
spilled and will produce an error.
Use
.B \-m 0
(or a value large enough to keep the table in memory) for very wide
datasets, or reduce the column count with
.B KEEP
or
.B DROP
before the spill threshold is reached.
.TP
.BI \-t " count"
Set the maximum number of temporary variables per data step.
.TP
.BI \-\-clen " len"
Set the maximum length of character (string) variables in bytes.
.TP
.BI \-\-shell\-timeout " seconds"
Set the timeout for
.B SYSTEM
commands and the
.B SHELL()
function.
A value of 0 disables the timeout (unlimited).
The default is 300 seconds in batch mode and 0 in interactive mode.
Requires the
.BR timeout (1)
utility on
.BR PATH ;
if
.BR timeout (1)
is absent, a one-time warning is printed and the limit is not enforced.
The timeout can also be adjusted at runtime with
.BR "OPTIONS SHELLTIMEOUT" .
.TP
.B \-\-noshell
Disable the
.B SYSTEM
command and the
.B SHELL()
function.
Useful in restricted or multi\-user environments.
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-continue\-on\-error
Continue executing the script after a statement\-level error rather than
aborting.
The error message is printed to standard error and processing resumes with
the next statement.
After a caught error,
.BR ERR ()
returns 1 and
.BR ERL ()
returns the record number where the error occurred.
.TP
.B \-\-ignore\-math\-errors
Instead of halting on a floating\-point domain error (e.g. LOG of a negative
number), emit a warning and return the missing value.
.TP
.B \-\-progress
Report record\-count progress on standard error for long\-running operations
(\fBUSE\fR file loads, the per\-record \fBRUN\fR data step, and \fBSORT\fR).
A counter is printed every 10,000 records and updated in place; progress is
written only to standard error, never to the data stream.
.TP
.BI \-o " file"
Redirect console output to
.IR file
in addition to standard output.
.TP
.B \-q
Quiet mode: suppress console output.
Error messages are still written to standard error.
.TP
.BI \-p " pager"
Specify an external pager program (e.g., \fBmore\fR or \fBless\fR) to use for
interactive console output.
This option is only relevant to interactive sessions and is ignored in
batch mode.
It is incompatible with and disabled by \fB\-\-noshell\fR.
.TP
.BI \-u ", " \-\-infmt " format"
Override the input dataset format.
Accepted values:
.BR CSV ", " ODF ", " OOXML .
.TP
.BI \-s ", " \-\-outfmt " format"
Override the output dataset format.
Accepted values:
.BR CSV ", " ODF ", " OOXML .
.TP
.B \-\-debug\fR[\fB=\fIN\fR]
Enables debug mode.
.I N
selects the verbosity level (default\~3 if omitted):
.RS
.TP
.B 1\ (sparse)
I/O transitions only:
.BR USE ,
.BR SUBMIT ,
and
.B RUN
completion events.
.TP
.B 2\ (normal)
Level\~1 plus a header line per record (annotated with BY\-group transitions),
.BR IF / ELSE
condition outcomes,
.B FOR
loop iterations,
.B SELECT
filter decisions (plus a kept/dropped summary line), and
.B DELETE
marks.
.TP
.B 3\ (verbose)
Level\~2 plus every
.BR LET / SET
assignment (scalar and array).
.RE
.IP
The verbosity level can be changed inside a script with
.BR "OPTIONS DEBUG " N .
In interactive sessions, any non-zero level enables execution pausing before
each record at the inspection prompt
.RB ( [debug:record\ N]> ).
At the prompt the following commands are available:
.RS
.TP
.B PRINT \fIexpr\fR
Evaluate and print any SData expression.
.TP
.B RECORD \fIN\fR
Load record
.I N
into the current view (absolute).
.TP
.B RECORD +\fIN\fR / RECORD \-\fIN\fR
Navigate
.I N
records forward or backward.
.TP
.B CONTINUE\fR (or \fBC\fR)
Process the current record and pause again on the next.
.TP
.B STEP\fR (or \fBS\fR)
Same as CONTINUE in record\-step mode.
.TP
.B RUN
Process the current and all remaining records without further pausing.
.RE
.SH LANGUAGE OVERVIEW
The
.B sdata
command language is statement\-based.
Statements fall into three categories:
.SS Identifiers and quoted identifiers
Variable and column names consist of uppercase letters, digits, underscores,
and an optional type suffix
.RB "(" "$" " for character," "%" " for integer)".
The language is case\-insensitive.
.PP
A column whose name collides with a reserved keyword (such as
.BR AS ,
.BR USE ,
or
.BR BY )
or contains spaces or dots can be referenced by enclosing it in
.IR backticks :
.PP
.RS
.B `AS`
\(em reference a column literally named AS
.br
.B `col with spaces`
\(em reference a column with embedded spaces
.RE
.PP
The backtick form is accepted wherever a bare identifier is accepted:
expressions,
.BR LET / SET ,
.BR PRINT ,
.BR KEEP / DROP ,
.BR RENAME ,
.BR BY ,
.BR ARRAY / DIM ,
.BR SORT ,
and per\-dataset
.BR KEEP= / DROP= / RENAME= / IN=
options.
Empty backticks
.RB ( `` )
and unterminated or multi\-line backtick strings are lexical errors.
.B NAMES
output and error messages show the bare name without backticks;
the backtick form is an input notation only.
.PP
When
.B USE
loads a dataset whose column names include reserved keywords,
.B sdata
emits an advisory warning and shows the backtick form to use.
Set
.B "OPTIONS WARNRESERVED NO"
to suppress these warnings.
.SS Declarative commands
Execute immediately and configure state for the next data step.
.RS
.TP
.B USE \fIspec\fR[\fB,\fR \fIspec\fR ...] [\fB/BY=\fIvar\fR ...] [\fB/INTERLEAVE\fR|\fB/JOIN\fR|\fB/APPEND\fR]
Load one or more datasets and install the result as the current table.
Each \fIspec\fR has the form:
.RS
.IP
\fIfile\fR[\fB[\fIsheet\fB]\fR] [\fBAS\fR \fIalias\fR] [\fB(\fIper\-dataset\-opts\fB)\fR]
.RE
.PP
For ODF and OOXML workbooks, an optional sheet name may be appended in
brackets immediately after the filename (e.g.\&
.BR """sales.xlsx[Q1]""" ).
If omitted, the first sheet is used.
.PP
When a single \fIspec\fR is given the existing slash-option syntax is also
accepted on the command line (e.g.\&
.BR "USE foo.csv /HEADER=NO" ).
.PP
\fBMerge modes\fR (when two or more specs are given):
.RS
.TP
.I (no /BY= option)
Positional merge.
Rows are combined by position; shorter datasets are padded with missing values.
.TP
.BI /BY= "var ..."
Match merge (full outer).
Inputs are auto-sorted by the BY variables; corresponding BY-group rows are
aligned.
A warning is emitted for each BY group in which two or more inputs each
contribute more than one row.
.TP
.BI "/BY=" "var ..." " /INTERLEAVE"
Interleave.
All rows from every input are retained, emitted in BY-sorted order.
.TP
.BI "/BY=" "var ..." " /JOIN"
Cartesian inner join.
Every combination of rows within each BY group is produced.
Unmatched BY groups are dropped.
A warning is emitted if a group\(cqs Cartesian product exceeds
.BR "OPTIONS JOIN_WARN_THRESHOLD" .
.TP
.B /APPEND
Vertical concatenation.
All rows of every input are stacked in the order the specs are listed:
all rows of the first dataset, then all rows of the second, and so on.
The result columns are the union of the input columns, matched by name;
a row carries missing values for any column its source dataset lacks.
Same-named numeric columns are reconciled (integer and floating-point
promote to floating-point), and a character column always occupies a
name ending in
.RB \(dq $ \(dq,
so a numeric and a character field of the same base name remain separate
columns.
.B /APPEND
requires two or more datasets and may not be combined with
.BR /BY= ,
.BR /INTERLEAVE ,
or
.BR /JOIN
(use
.B /INTERLEAVE
for BY-sorted stacking).
.RE
.PP
\fBPer-dataset options\fR (inside the parenthesis block for each \fIspec\fR):
.RS
.TP
.BI KEEP= "name ..."
Retain only the named columns from this input.
.TP
.BI DROP= "name ..."
Remove the named columns from this input.
.B KEEP
and
.B DROP
may not both appear for the same dataset.
.TP
.BI RENAME= "(" "old=new" " [, " "old=new" " ...]" ")"
Rename columns in this input.
All pairs are applied simultaneously (based on original names), matching SAS
semantics.
.B RENAME
is applied before
.B KEEP
and
.BR DROP .
If the new name's type suffix differs from the column's current type, the column
is retyped: a change within the numeric family converts the values (float to
integer truncates toward zero).
A rename crossing the numeric/character boundary (a "$" suffix added to or
removed from a numeric column, or removed from a character column) is rejected
and the entire RENAME is aborted with no change applied.
.TP
.BI IN= varname
Create a temporary integer variable set to 1 for records that originate from
this dataset and 0 for records padded from other datasets.
.TP
.BI FMT= format
Override the input format for this dataset
.RB ( CSV ", " ODF ", " OOXML ).
.TP
.BI HEADER= YES|NO
Whether the first row is a header (default YES).
.TP
.BI CHARSET= enc
Character encoding (e.g.\& UTF\-8, UTF\-16, ASCII).
.TP
.BI DLM= delim
Field delimiter for CSV files (default comma; multi-character delimiters
are supported).
.TP
.BI NSCAN= n
Number of rows scanned to infer column types (default 20; CSV only).
.TP
.BI SKIP= n
Skip the first
.I n
data rows after the header before reading.
.TP
.BI MAXROWS= n
Limit the number of data rows loaded from this dataset.
.RE
.PP
\fBColumn\-name collisions\fR across inputs (excluding BY variables) are resolved
by last-dataset-wins.
One warning is emitted per colliding name (not per row).
Use
.B RENAME=
to resolve collisions explicitly.
.TP
.B SAVE \fIspec\fR[\fB,\fR \fIspec\fR ...]
Register one or more output targets to be written at the end of the next
.BR RUN .
Each \fIspec\fR has the form:
.RS
.IP
\fIfile\fR[\fB[\fIsheet\fB]\fR] [\fBAS\fR \fIalias\fR] [\fB(\fIper\-target\-opts\fB)\fR]
.RE
.PP
For ODF and OOXML output, an optional sheet name in brackets sets the
name of the sheet in the output workbook (e.g.\&
.BR """report.ods[Summary]""" ).
If omitted, the sheet is named
.BR Sheet1 .
A subsequent
.B SAVE
replaces the current registration list.
A bare
.B SAVE
(no arguments) cancels all pending registrations.
.PP
\fBPer-target options\fR (inside the parenthesis block for each \fIspec\fR):
.RS
.TP
.BI KEEP= "name ..."
Write only the named columns to this target.
.TP
.BI DROP= "name ..."
Exclude the named columns from this target.
.B KEEP
and
.B DROP
may not both appear for the same target.
.TP
.BI RENAME= "(" "old=new" " [, " "old=new" " ...]" ")"
Rename columns in the output projection for this target.
The in-memory PDV is not modified.
If the new name's type suffix differs from the column's current type, the column
is retyped in the output: a change within the numeric family converts the values
(float to integer truncates toward zero).
A rename crossing the numeric/character boundary is rejected and the entire
RENAME is aborted with no change applied.
.TP
.BI IF= expr
Row-level filter for this target.
A record is written to this target only when
.I expr
is true.
Absent
.B IF=
means always write.
.TP
.BI FMT= format
Output format for this target
.RB ( CSV ", " ODF ", " OOXML ).
.TP
.BI HEADER= YES|NO
Whether to write a header row (default YES).
.TP
.BI CHARSET= enc
Character encoding for this target (e.g.\& UTF\-8).
.RE
.PP
The
.B AS
\fIalias\fR clause gives a target a short name usable with
.BR "WRITE target" .
Aliases must be unique within a
.B SAVE
statement.
Two targets may not write the same filename.
Single-target
.B SAVE
retains full existing semantics.
.TP
.B BY \fIvar\fR [\fIvar\fR ...]
Define BY\-group variables.
The indicators
.BR BOG() " and " EOG()
and the
.BR FIRST.\fIvar\fR " and " LAST.\fIvar
flags are set accordingly for each record.
Bare
.B BY
(no variables) cancels an active grouping.
.TP
.B SELECT \fIexpr\fR
Activate a row filter: only records for which
.I expr
is true are visible to subsequent data steps.
All record\-navigation functions
.RB ( RECNO ", " BOF ", " EOF ", " LAG ", " NEXT )
operate within the filtered (logical) view.
The filter is rebuilt automatically at the start of every
.BR RUN .
.TP
.B SELECT /ALL
Cancel the active row filter; all records become visible again.
.TP
.B SORT \fIvar\fR [\fIvar\fR ...]
Sort the data table on the named variables.
.TP
.B REPEAT \fIn\fR
Create
.I n
output records in the next data step (REPEAT mode).
Also cancels any queued deferred statements
.RB ( LET ,
.B SET ,
etc.); enter setup statements
.I after
the
.B REPEAT
command, not before it.
.TP
.B FPATH \fIpath\fR /\fBUSE\fR|\fBSAVE\fR|\fBSUBMIT\fR|\fBOUTPUT\fR
Set the default directory for the specified file category.
.TP
.B DIGITS \fIn\fR
Set the maximum number of decimal places used when printing floating\-point
values (default 5).
Takes effect immediately and persists until the next
.B DIGITS
command.
.RE
.SS Immediate commands
Execute immediately; not part of the data step body.
.RS
.TP
.B RUN
Execute all deferred statements once per record (data step), then commit
the output table.
.TP
.B NEW
Clear the data table, all variables, the queued program, and any active
SELECT filter or BY grouping.
.TP
.B SORT \fIvar\fR [\fIvar\fR ...]
Re\-order the data table.
.TP
.B AGGREGATE \fIoutvar\fB=\fIfn\fB(\fIinvar\fB)\fR [\fIoutvar\fB=\fIfn\fB(\fIinvar\fB)\fR ...]
Collapse the data table to one row per active
.B BY
group, computing an aggregate
.I fn
.RB ( SUM ,
.BR MEAN ,
.BR STD ,
.BR VAR ,
.BR MIN ,
.BR MAX ,
.BR N ,
.BR NMISS ,
.BR GMEAN ,
.BR HMEAN ,
or
.BR MEDIAN )
over each input column.
With no active
.B BY
the whole table is one group.
.I invar
may be a scalar column, a whole array (applied element\-wise to each subscript),
or an array element such as
.IR x(1) ;
.B N()
with no argument is the group row count.
The active
.B SELECT
filter is respected during the scan; a pending
.B SAVE
is written; then the active
.B SELECT
and
.B BY
are cleared.
The deferred program buffer must hold no un\-run statements (issue
.B RUN
or
.B NEW
first).
.TP
.B TRANSPOSE\fR [\fB/KEEP=\fIvarlist\fB]\fR [\fB/DROP=\fIvarlist\fB]\fR [\fB/NAME=\fIvar$\fB]\fR [\fB/ID=\fIvar\fB]\fR [\fB/ARRAY=\fIvar\fB]
Reshape the data table so that each column in the transposed set becomes one
output row and each input row becomes a value column.
With an active
.B BY
each block is transposed separately into the same output table.
.PP
.RS
.TP
.B /KEEP=\fIvarlist\fR , \fB/DROP=\fIvarlist
Select the
.I transposed set
(columns to become rows): the effective set is KEEP\e\|DROP; default is all
non\-BY columns.
All columns in the set must share a single type (all numeric or all character).
.TP
.B /NAME=\fIvar$
Name the output character column that holds each source column's name;
default
.IR _NAME_$ .
Must end in
.BR $ .
.TP
.B /ARRAY=\fIvar
Long form: produces
.IR var (1).. var (K)
where K is the maximum block row count.
Shorter blocks are padded with missing values.
The
.B $
suffix of
.I var
must match the transposed\-set type.
Mutually exclusive with
.BR /ID .
If neither is given,
.B /ARRAY=_X_
is implied.
.TP
.B /ID=\fIvar
Wide form: the values of
.I var
become output column names in first\-encounter order across all blocks.
.I var
is auto\-excluded from the transposed set.
Blocks missing a given ID value leave that cell missing.
Mutually exclusive with
.BR /ARRAY .
.RE
.PP
The active
.B SELECT
filter is respected; a pending
.B SAVE
is written; then the active
.B SELECT
and
.B BY
are cleared.
The deferred program buffer must be empty (issue
.B RUN
or
.B NEW
first).
See also
.BR AGGREGATE .
.TP
.B STATS\fR [\fIvar\fB ...]\fR [\fB/STATS=\fIstat\fB ...]\fR [\fB/NOPRINT\fR]
Compute summary statistics for the chosen
.I var
list (default: all numeric columns excluding active BY variables), producing one output row per active
.B BY
group per variable, with one column per statistic.
The result replaces the data table.
.RS
.TP
.B /STATS=\fIstat ...
Statistics to compute; default
.BR "N MIN MEAN MAX STD" .
Any registered aggregate
.RB ( SUM ", " MEAN ", " STD ", " VAR ", " MIN ", " MAX ", " N ", " NMISS ", " GMEAN ", " HMEAN ", " MEDIAN ).
Only
.B N
and
.B NMISS
may be applied to a character variable.
.TP
.B /NOPRINT
Replace the table (and write a pending
.BR SAVE )
without printing the result.
.RE
.PP
A whole-array name in
.I var
expands to one row per element
.RI ( name (1).. name (K)).
The active
.B SELECT
filter is respected; a pending
.B SAVE
is written; then the active
.B SELECT
and
.B BY
are cleared.
The deferred program buffer must hold no un\-run statements (issue
.B RUN
or
.B NEW
first).
See also
.BR AGGREGATE .
.TP
.B TABLES\fR \fIrequest\fR [\fIrequest\fR ...] [\fB/CHISQ\fR] [\fB/MISSING\fR] [\fB/ORDER=FREQ\fR] [\fB/LIST\fR] [\fB/NOCUM\fR] [\fB/NOPERCENT\fR]
Print frequency and crosstabulation reports (SAS PROC FREQ analogue).
A
.I request
is a single variable name for a one\-way table, or two or more variable names
joined by
.B *
for a crossing
.RB ( A*B
two\-way;
.B A*B*C
multiway).
Multiple requests may appear in one statement; all options apply to every request.
.B TABLES
is print\-only: the data table,
.BR SELECT ,
and
.B BY
are left unchanged after the command completes.
.RS
.TP
.B /CHISQ
Chi\-square family (Pearson, likelihood\-ratio, Mantel\-Haenszel; continuity\-adjusted
for 2x2) plus phi, contingency coefficient, and Cramer's V.
A warning is printed when more than 20% of expected cell counts fall below 5 (two\-way tables).
One\-way: equal\-proportions goodness\-of\-fit.
Not computed for tables of three or more variables (skipped with a warning).
.TP
.B /MISSING
Treat missing values as an ordinary category (default: excluded; a
.I "Frequency Missing = N"
line is printed beneath the table when values are excluded).
.TP
.B /ORDER=FREQ
Order levels by descending frequency (default: by value).
.TP
.B /LIST
Render a two\-way table in list form (one row per observed combination)
instead of the default grid.
No\-op for one\-way tables; always active for three\-or\-more\-way tables.
.TP
.B /NOCUM
Suppress cumulative frequency and cumulative percent columns
(one\-way and list forms).
.TP
.B /NOPERCENT
Suppress the overall cell percent figure.
.RE
.PP
One\-way output: level, Frequency, Percent, Cum Freq, Cum Percent, and a Total row.
Two\-way output: a contingency grid with stacked cell Frequency/Percent/Row%/Col%
plus row, column, and grand totals.
Multiway output (and two\-way with
.BR /LIST ):
list form with one row per observed combination and columns: the crossing variables, Frequency, Percent,
Cum Freq, Cum Percent.
For crossings, an observation is excluded if any crossing variable is missing
(unless
.BR /MISSING );
the excluded count is reported as a
.I "Frequency Missing = N"
line.
The active
.B SELECT
filter is respected; one table set is produced per active
.B BY
group.
The deferred program buffer must be empty (issue
.B RUN
or
.B NEW
first).
See also
.BR STATS .
.TP
.B NAMES
List all permanent and temporary variables currently defined.
.TP
.B LIST
Display the numbered contents of the program buffer (the deferred statements
queued for the next
.BR RUN ).
Reports
.I "(Empty program buffer)"
when nothing is queued.
.TP
.B DISPLAY [\fIvar\fR ...]
Show the current Data Table as a formatted table with a record\-number column.
With no arguments all columns are shown; with a variable list only those
columns appear.
Column ranges are supported:
.BR "DISPLAY A-Z" .
Respects any active
.B SELECT
filter.
.TP
.BR "DELETE " \fIn\fR [ \fB\-\fIm\fR ]
Remove program buffer entries
.I n
through
.I m
(1\-based, inclusive).
Omitting
.I m
removes only entry
.IR n .
Only meaningful in interactive mode.
.TP
.BR "INSERT " [ \fIn\fR | \fB$\fR ]
Set the program\-buffer insertion point.
.B INSERT 0
inserts before the first line;
.BI INSERT " n"
inserts after existing line
.IR n ;
.B "INSERT $"
(or bare
.BR INSERT )
appends at the end (the default).
The cursor is sticky \(em it persists across
.B RUN
and advances as lines are inserted;
.B NEW
or another
.B INSERT
resets it.
An
.I n
past the end warns and clamps to the end.
A negative
.I n
is rejected (no-op, with a warning).
Only meaningful in interactive (REPL) mode.
.TP
.B SUBMIT \fIfile\fR
Execute commands from an external script file (default extension
.BR .CMD ).
.TP
.B OPTIONS [\fIkey value\fR]
Set or display runtime options.
With no arguments, lists all current option values.
Notable keys:
.B SHELLTIMEOUT \fIn\fR
(SYSTEM/SHELL timeout in seconds; 0 = unlimited; reset to startup default by
.BR NEW ),
.B IEEE_DIVIDE YES|NO
(float division by zero returns +/\-Inf),
.B CSVDLM \fIdelim\fR,
.B HEADER YES|NO,
.B SAVEOVERWRT YES|NO,
.B TXTFMT AUTO|LF|CRLF|CR,
.B CHARSET \fIname\fR,
.B MAXINTAB \fIn\fR,
and
.B MAXTEMPMEM \fIn\fR,
and
.B JOIN_WARN_THRESHOLD \fIn\fR
(per-BY-group Cartesian product threshold above which
.B /JOIN
merges emit a warning; default 1,000,000; set to 0 to disable),
and
.B PROGRESS YES|NO
(runtime equivalent of
.BR \-\-progress ;
emit record-count progress on standard error for long USE/RUN/SORT runs),
and
.B WARNRESERVED YES|NO
(emit a warning when a loaded column name matches a reserved keyword; default YES).
.TP
.B SYSTEM \fIcmd\fR
Run an external shell command.
Disabled by
.BR \-\-noshell .
A timeout is applied when
.B OPTIONS SHELLTIMEOUT
is greater than 0; the command is killed and a
.B Script_Error
is raised if it exceeds the limit.
See
.B \-\-shell\-timeout
and
.B OPTIONS SHELLTIMEOUT
for details.
.TP
.BR HELP " [\fItopic\fR | " /ALL ]
Display built\-in help.
Without an argument, list all commands and functions.
With
.B /ALL
print the full reference.
.TP
.BR QUIT " | " END
Exit the interpreter.
.RE
.SS Deferred statements
Queued between two
.B RUN
commands and executed once per record during the data step.
.RS
.TP
.B LET \fIvar\fR = \fIexpr\fR
Assign a permanent (table) variable.
Array element forms:
.B LET \fIarr\fR(\fIi\fR) = \fIexpr\fR
assigns a single element;
.B LET \fIarr\fR(\fIlo\fR:\fIhi\fR) = \fIexpr\fR
assigns a contiguous slice;
.B LET \fIarr\fR(\fIi\fR,\fIj\fR,...) = \fIexpr\fR
assigns a list of elements.
.TP
.B SET \fIvar\fR = \fIexpr\fR
Assign a temporary variable (not written to the output table).
Array element forms are the same as for
.BR LET .
.TP
.B PRINT [\fIexpr\fR ...]
Print values to the console.
With no arguments, prints all permanent variables for the current record.
.TP
.B IF \fIcond\fR THEN \fIstmt\fR [ELSEIF \fIcond\fR THEN \fIstmt\fR] [ELSE \fIstmt\fR]
Conditional execution.
Block form (terminated by
.BR "END IF" )
is also supported.
.TP
.B SELECT [\fIexpr\fR] CASE \fIval\fR : \fIstmt\fR ... END SELECT
Multi\-way branch.
.TP
.B FOR \fIvar\fR = \fIstart\fR TO \fIend\fR [STEP \fIs\fR] ... NEXT
Counter\-controlled loop.
.TP
.B WHILE \fIcond\fR ... WEND
Condition\-controlled loop.
.TP
.B REPEAT ... UNTIL \fIcond\fR
Post\-test loop.
.TP
.B DELETE
Discard the current record; no output is written for it.
See
.B "DELETE n[-m]"
under
.I "Immediate commands"
for program\-buffer deletion.
.TP
.B BREAK
Pauses execution and enters the interactive debug inspection prompt (see
.BR \-\-debug ).
In non\-interactive contexts (batch mode, piped input) emits a message to
standard error and continues automatically.
When BREAK fires, the remaining statements in the current record are not
executed for that record.
Execution resumes from the first statement of the next record after
.BR CONTINUE .
Valid only inside a data step.
.TP
.B BREAK WHEN \fIexpr\fR
Like
.BR BREAK ,
but only pauses when the boolean expression
.I expr
is true.
Examples:
.B BREAK WHEN RECNO() = 50
or
.BR "BREAK WHEN SALARY > 100000" .
.TP
.B WRITE [\fItarget\fR[\fB,\fR \fItarget\fR ...]]
Explicitly write the current PDV to the output.
Suppresses the automatic end\-of\-record flush for that iteration.
With no arguments, writes to every registered
.B SAVE
target.
With one or more \fItarget\fR names (aliases or filenames registered via
.BR SAVE ),
writes only to those targets.
Multiple
.B WRITE
statements in a single iteration are allowed; writing the same target
twice produces two output records (matching SAS OUTPUT semantics).
Naming an unregistered target is a runtime error.
A bare
.B WRITE
with non-empty
.B SAVE
registrations writes to every target whose
.B IF=
filter passes; bare
.B WRITE
with no registrations retains the legacy single-output flush.
.TP
.BR KEEP " | " DROP " \fIvar\fR [\fIvar\fR ...]"
Retain or remove columns from the output table after the next
.BR RUN .
.TP
.B HOLD [\fIvar\fR ...]
Retain variable values across records (instead of resetting to missing).
.TP
.B RENAME \fIold\fR=\fInew\fR [, \fIold\fR=\fInew\fR ...]
Rename columns.
.TP
.B ARRAY \fIname\fR \fIvar\fR [\fIvar\fR ...]
Create a virtual array providing indexed access to existing variables.
.TP
.B DIM \fIname\fR (\fIn\fR) [/TEMP]
.br
.B DIM \fIname\fR (\fIlo\fR TO \fIhi\fR) [/TEMP]
Create a numeric array with real storage (indices 1..\fIn\fR or \fIlo\fR..\fIhi\fR).
Elements are initialised to missing.
Use
.B /TEMP
to confine the array to the current data step.
Array elements are read and written with parenthesis subscripts; see
.B LET
for slice and list assignment forms.
.RE
.SS Entry\-time semantic checks
Before any record is processed, sdata validates queued deferred statements and
reports hard errors for the following conditions:
.RS
.TP
Assignment type mismatch
A character value assigned to a numeric name or a numeric value assigned to a
character
.RB ( $ )
name.
Sound and complete when the right-hand side's type is statically determinable
(including suffix-typed variables and functions); expressions whose type is not
statically known defer to runtime.
.TP
Unknown function
A function name not registered in the evaluator.
These formerly returned a missing value silently; they are now a hard error.
.TP
Function arity
Wrong number of arguments for a known function.
.TP
Undefined variable
A variable reference that cannot be resolved against the table schema, active session
variables, or names introduced anywhere in the same deferred block.
Forward references within a single block are legal.
These formerly returned a missing value silently; they are now a hard error.
.RE
.PP
In
.I interactive
mode, checks 1\(en3 run the moment each deferred statement is entered (entry-time
fast feedback).
Check 4 (undefined variable) waits until
.B RUN
because a name introduced by a later statement not yet entered would otherwise be a
false positive.
In
.I batch
mode all four checks run as a single whole\-block pass immediately before the data
step; no records are processed if any check fails.
.SH FUNCTIONS
Functions may appear anywhere in an expression.
Missing\-value propagation is automatic: if any required argument is missing
the result is missing, unless noted otherwise.
.SS Mathematical
.BR ABS (x),\  SQRT (x)\  /\  SQR (x),\  EXP (x)
.br
.BR SGN (x)
\(em sign of x: \-1, 0, or 1.
.br
Natural log:
.BR LOG (x)\  /\  LN (x)\  /\  LOGE (x)
.br
Base\-10 log:
.BR LOG10 (x)\  /\  CLG (x)\  /\  LGT (x)
.br
Base\-2 log:
.BR LOG2 (x)
.br
.BR FLOOR (x),\  CEIL (x),\  ROUND (x[,n]),\  MOD (x,y)
.br
.BR INT (x)
\(em floor (rounds toward \-infinity).
.br
.BR FIX (x)\  /\  IP (x)
\(em integer part, truncated toward zero.
.br
.BR FP (x)
\(em fractional part: x \- FIX(x).
.SS Trigonometric
Radian variants:
.BR SIN ,\  COS ,\  TAN ,\  ATN / ARCTAN ,\  ATAN2 ,\  ARCSIN ,\  ARCCOS ,\  COT ,\  CSC ,\  SEC .
.br
Hyperbolic:
.BR SINH / HSN ,\  COSH / HCS ,\  TANH / HTN .
.br
Angle conversion:
.BR DEG (x)\  /\  DEGREE (x)
\(em radians to degrees.
.br
Degree variants:
.BR SIND ,\  COSD ,\  TAND ,\  ATND ,\  ATAN2D .
.SS String
.BR LEN (s$),\  LEFT$ (s$,n),\  RIGHT$ (s$,n),\  MID$ (s$,start[,len])
.br
.BR TRIM$ (s$),\  LTRIM$ (s$),\  RTRIM$ (s$)
.br
.BR UCASE$ / UPPER$ (s$),\  LCASE$ / LOWER$ (s$)
.br
.BR POS (needle$,haystack$),\  INSTR (haystack$,needle$)
\(em INSTR uses BW BASIC argument order (haystack first).
.br
.BR CHR$ (n),\  ASCII (s$)\  /\  ASC (s$),\  STR$ (x),\  NUM$ (x),\  VAL (s$),\  NUM (x)
.SS Base conversion
.BR HEX$ (n),\  OCT$ (n),\  BIN$ (n)
.SS Aggregate (row\-wise, across argument list)
.BR SUM ,\  MEAN ,\  GMEAN ,\  HMEAN ,\  STD ,\  VAR ,\  MIN ,\  MAX ,\  MEDIAN ,\  N ,\  NMISS
.PP
.B STD
and
.B VAR
use the sample formula (n\-1 denominator) and return missing when
fewer than two non\-missing values are supplied.
.B GMEAN
returns missing if any argument is \(<= 0.
.B HMEAN
returns missing if any argument is zero.
.SS Record navigation
All of the following operate in
.I logical
space when a
.B SELECT
filter is active; filtered\-out rows are invisible.
.TP
.BR RECNO ()
Current logical record number (1\-based).
.TP
.BR BOF ()
1 if this is the first visible record, else 0.
.TP
.BR EOF ()
1 if this is the last visible record, else 0.
.TP
.BR BOG ()
1 at the beginning of a BY group, else 0.
.TP
.BR EOG ()
1 at the end of a BY group, else 0.
.TP
.BI LAG( var [,n] )\ /\ LAGC$( var [,n] )
Value of
.I var
in the record
.I n
positions back (default 1).
Returns missing at a dataset or BY\-group boundary.
The variable name may be given unquoted:
.B LAG(X)
is equivalent to
.BR LAG(""X"") .
.TP
.BI NEXT( var [,n] )\ /\ NEXTC$( var [,n] )
Value of
.I var
in the record
.I n
positions ahead (default 1).
Returns missing at a dataset or BY\-group boundary.
.TP
.BI OBS( var ,row )\ /\ OBSC$( var ,row )
Value of
.I var
in the physical row
.I row
(1\-based, ignores the SELECT filter).
Returns missing if
.I row
is out of range.
.SS Conditional function
.BI IF( cond , true_val , false_val )
.br
Returns
.I true_val
when
.I cond
is non\-zero or non\-empty, else
.IR false_val .
.SS Special
.BR MISSING (x)
\(em 1 if x is missing, else 0.
.br
.BR FALSE
\(em the constant 0.
.br
.BR TRUE
\(em the constant 1.
.br
.BR RAN ()\ /\ RANDOM ()\ /\ RND ()
\(em uniform random number in [0,\ 1).
.br
.BR DATE$ ()
\(em current date as
.IR YYYY\-MM\-DD .
.br
.BR TIME$ ()
\(em current time as
.IR HH:MM:SS .
.br
.BR SHELL( cmd$ )
\(em run a shell command; returns 0 on success (disabled by
.BR \-\-noshell ).
.br
.BR ERR ()
\(em last caught error code: 1 after an error caught by
.BR \-k ,
0 otherwise.
Reset to 0 by
.BR NEW .
.br
.BR ERL ()
\(em record number where the last caught error occurred; 0 if none.
Reset to 0 by
.BR NEW .
.SS Arrays
.BR LBOUND ( arrayname )
\(em lower bound (first valid subscript) of the named array.
.br
.BR UBOUND ( arrayname )\ /\ HBOUND ( arrayname )
\(em upper bound (last valid subscript) of the named array.
.B HBOUND
is the SAS\-compatible spelling;
.B UBOUND
is retained for compatibility.
.br
Both functions accept the array name as a bare identifier or as a string literal.
Returns missing if the array does not exist.
.SS Statistical distributions
Each distribution family provides four function variants.
The one\-letter prefix identifies the distribution; the suffix identifies
the variant:
.TP
.B DF
Probability density function (or probability mass function for discrete
distributions).
.TP
.B CF
Cumulative distribution function: P(X\ \(<=\ x).
.TP
.B IF
Inverse CDF (quantile function): value x such that P(X\ \(<=\ x)\ =\ p,
where 0\ <\ p\ <\ 1.
.TP
.B RN
Generate a random variate.
.PP
Available distribution families:
.TS
tab(|);
lb lb lb
l l l.
Prefix|Distribution|Parameters
Z|Standard Normal|[\fImu\fR, \fIsigma\fR] (default mu=0, sigma=1)
N|Binomial|\fIn\fR, \fIprob\fR (discrete; alias: M)
U|Uniform|[\fIlo\fR, \fIhi\fR] (default lo=0, hi=1; RN only)
E|Exponential|\fIrate\fR
B|Beta|\fIa\fR, \fIb\fR (shape)
P|Poisson|\fIlambda\fR (discrete; k = integer)
G|Gamma|\fIshape\fR, \fIrate\fR
X|Chi\-square|\fIdf\fR
T|Student's t|\fIdf\fR
F|F distribution|\fIdf1\fR, \fIdf2\fR
M|Binomial|\fIn\fR, \fIprob\fR (discrete; alias: N)
W|Weibull|\fIscale\fR, \fIshape\fR
L|Logistic|none (standard; location=0, scale=1)
.TE
.PP
For each family the density/mass variant takes
.I x
(or
.I k
for discrete families) as its first argument, followed by the distribution
parameters.
The CDF and IDF variants have the same parameter order; the RN variant
takes only the distribution parameters.
.PP
Use
.B HELP DISTRIBUTIONS
from within
.B sdata
for a complete listing.
.SH FILE FORMATS
.TP
.B CSV
Comma\-separated values.
The default delimiter is a comma; it can be overridden per-file with
.B /DLM=
on
.B USE
or session-wide with
.B "OPTIONS CSVDLM=\fIdelim\fR"
(multi-character delimiters are supported).
The character encoding can be set with
.B /CHARSET=
on
.B USE
or with
.BR "OPTIONS CHARSET=\fIenc\fR" .
Auto-detection handles UTF-8 and UTF-16 (BOM-detected).
.TP
.B ODF / ODS
OpenDocument Spreadsheet (ISO/IEC 26300).
.TP
.B OOXML / XLSX
Office Open XML spreadsheet (ECMA\-376 / ISO/IEC 29500).
.PP
File format is auto\-detected from the file extension when not specified
explicitly.
Script files conventionally use the extension
.BR .CMD .
.SS Column types
On load, each column's data type is taken from the trailing character of
its header name:
.TP
.IR name $
A string (character) column.
.TP
.IR name %
An integer column.
Non\-integer numeric values are truncated toward zero (with a warning);
values that are not valid integers \(em non\-numeric, or outside the
representable integer range \(em are stored as missing (with a warning).
.TP
.I name
(no suffix) A floating\-point numeric column.
If its values are non\-numeric, the column is loaded as a string column
instead and a
.B $
is appended to its name.
.PP
This is the same
.B $
(string) and
.B %
(integer) suffix convention used for variable names.
.SS Formula cells in spreadsheets
.B sdata
does not contain a spreadsheet formula evaluator.
When a spreadsheet file (ODF or OOXML) is opened and formula cells are
detected,
.B sdata
attempts to recalculate them by invoking
.BR "LibreOffice headless" :
.PP
.RS
.nf
soffice \-\-headless \-\-convert\-to ...
.fi
.RE
.PP
If
.B soffice
is found on
.BR PATH ,
the file is converted to the opposite format (ODS\(->XLSX or XLSX\(->ODS),
which forces recalculation; the converted file is then parsed and the
temporary copy deleted.
.PP
If
.B soffice
is not available, or if the conversion fails,
.B sdata
falls back to the
.I cached values
stored in the file at the time it was last saved.
For files saved normally by LibreOffice or Excel this produces correct
results, because both applications cache formula results in the file.
A warning is printed to stderr in this case (suppressed by
.BR \-q ).
.PP
Cached values may be stale or absent in files that contain volatile
functions
.RB ( =TODAY() ,
.BR =NOW() ,
.BR =RAND() ),
were saved with manual recalculation mode enabled, or were generated
programmatically without caching results.
In those cases the affected cells will read as missing values.
.PP
A built\-in formula evaluator is planned for a future release.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Interactive session
.nf
$ sdata
sdata> use "sales.csv"
sdata> by region$
sdata> let total = price * qty
sdata> run
sdata> save "summary.csv"
sdata> quit
.fi
.SS Batch script
.nf
$ cat report.cmd
use "survey.csv"
select age >= 18
by state$
let income_k = income / 1000
print state$, mean(income_k), std(income_k), n(income_k)
run
save "report.csv"

$ sdata report.cmd
.fi
.SS Creating a synthetic dataset
.nf
$ sdata
sdata> repeat 100
sdata> let x = ran()
sdata> let y = 2*x + nrn(0, 0.1)
sdata> run
sdata> save "simdata.csv"
sdata> quit
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful completion.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred (parse error, file not found, unhandled exception, etc.).
.SH COMPATIBILITY NOTES
.B sdata
is a statistical data\-step interpreter, not a BASIC interpreter.
Its expression syntax and some function names are loosely modelled on
BW BASIC (Bywater BASIC), but the two systems differ in fundamental ways.
.PP
.B Intentional divergences from BW BASIC:
.TP
.B No line numbers
.B sdata
programs have no line numbers.
.B LIST
displays program\-buffer entries by sequential index (1, 2, 3, \&...).
.B DELETE\ n[\-m]
removes entries by index, not by BASIC line number.
.TP
.B No GOTO / GOSUB
Unstructured branching is not supported.
Control flow is provided by
.BR IF / THEN / ELSE ,
.BR FOR / NEXT ,
.BR WHILE / WEND ,
.BR REPEAT ,
and
.BR SELECT\ CASE .
.TP
.B ERL() returns a record index
In BW BASIC,
.B ERL
is the line number where the error occurred.
In
.BR sdata ,
.B ERL()
returns the logical record number being processed when the error was caught,
which is more useful in a data\-step context.
.TP
.B Numeric output format
.B sdata
displays numeric values with five decimal places in fixed\-point notation
(e.g.\& \fB3.14159\fR).
BW BASIC uses a different default format.
.TP
.B Data\-table commands
.BR USE ,
.BR SAVE ,
.BR RUN ,
.BR BY ,
.BR SELECT\ (filter) ,
.BR DISPLAY ,
.BR REPEAT ,
and the statistical functions have no BW BASIC equivalent.
They are specific to the
.B sdata
data\-step model.
.TP
.B Function name aliases
Several function names supported by
.B sdata
are provided for BW BASIC compatibility:
.B SQR
(synonym for
.BR SQRT ),
.B SGN
(sign function),
.B RND
(synonym for
.BR RAN ),
.B INSTR
(like
.B POS
but with haystack\-first argument order),
and
.B ASC
(synonym for
.BR ASCII ).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR awk (1),
.BR gawk (1),
.BR csvkit (1),
.BR R (1)
.SH AUTHOR
John L. Ries <john@theyarnbard.com>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 John L. Ries.
Released under the MIT License.
